(C) Martin Väth <martin@mvath.de>
This project is under the BSD license.

sudox is a POSIX shell script which acts as a wrapper for
sudo -H [-s] which can pass X cookies

It is possible to create temporary untrusted X permissions.
Also some support for tty handling (e.g. screen and tmux) is provided.

For more details, see the output of sudox -h

If you want to change the user for the remainder of the whole shell session
and are somewhat paranoic to do this by accident from a runnnig
screen or tmux session, you can use "sudoxe" in place of sudox:
This is essentially "exec sudox", but checks your environment first.
Be aware that when using sudoxe (or "exec sudox") and sudo asks for a
password, a wrong password will terminate your session anyway.
(Please let me know if you know a trick how to avoid this problem...)


Installation:

For installation, copy sudox bin/* to your $PATH and add the line

. sudoxe

to your shell startup file to define the shell functions sudox() and sudoxe()
(sudox() calls sudox with a secure PATH setting). Alternatively, add these
functions or modifications thereof directly to your shell startup file.

To obtain support for zsh completion, you can copy zsh/* to a directory
of zsh's $fpath

You need push.sh from https://github.com/vaeth/push in your $PATH as well.

For Gentoo, there is an ebuild in the mv overlay (available by layman).


Security notes:

X cookies should be kept secret, because every user who knows them can access
the running X session. The main purpose of sudox is to pass such X cookies
to the freshly started sudo process.
Below are described all 4 methods (and a method avoiding X cookie passing)
which can be used by sudox for this.
Each of these methods has certain restrictions or security implications;
therefore you can choose by options.
The environment variable SUDOX_OPT can be used to set options which
preselect some of these methods.
Since sudox-8.0.0, the most secure option is the default; therefore,
SUDOX_OPT should only be set if no other option can be sued.
SUDOX_OPT thus is a potential security issue and it will perhaps be
ignored in some future relase of sudox, so try to not rely on it.

1. Best method: "Environment variable" method
Since sudox-8.0.0, this method is the default with variable name DISPLAY.
This method requires that sudo is configured to keep the variable (DISPLAY) in
the environment (see the comments in the provided sudoers.d).
To specify a different variable name, use the sudox option -vVAR
If the sudo configuration cannot be modified and is not known and the default
DISPLAY does not work, try one of the following values for VAR first:
COLORS, HOSTNAME, LS_COLORS, PS1, PS2, XAUTHORITY, XAUTHORIZATION
Less optimal (though perhaps working) are sudo-checked variables like these:
COLORTERM, LANG, LANGUAGE, LC_*, LINGUAS, TERM, TZ
Every name matching the regular expression ^[A-Z_a-z][A-Za-z0-9_]* can be used;
excluded are only those names which match ^sx_[a-z] or which influence shell
execution like PATH, IFS, BASH_ENV, ENV, SHELL_OPTS.
The variable will only be used temporarily by sudox for the transfer; the
original content will be restored after this temporary usage (sudox will even
unset the variable if it was not in the original environment).

SECURITY IMPLICATION: Do not use this method if your system is such that the
(initial) process environment can be read by other users (on linux, check e.g.
that /proc/*/environment is only user readable). Otherwise, your X cookies
are leaked this way!

2. Second best method: File descriptors
If the method above is not possible (e.g. because sudo is configured to not
pass _any_ variable and you cannot change the configuration), sudox can use
an open file descriptor to pass X cookies. This method is secure, but only
suboptimal, because sudox still needs to keep a process running to fill
the descriptor and cannot terminate until the sudo program returns:
The sudo process becomes a child of the sudox process (with possible
security implications about sending signals to an unprivileged process).
Use the sudox option -F# or -F#,#a to use this method with file descriptor #
as channel for X cookie passing and an auxiliary file descriptor #a.
As # you can either use some unused descriptor (at least 3) or the
standard input 0. Depending on your shell, # and #a must be at most 9.

a) If # is at least 3 then sudo must be configured to not close this file
descriptor, e.g. by allowing closefrom_override (see the provided sudoers.d)
and passing a correpesponding -C option. To use this mode, also #a is needed
which should be at least 3 and not be used for another purpose (but which
can be closed by sudo). If #a is not specified or empty, (# + 1) is chosen.
A typical example usage of this option is -F3 (which is the same as -F3,4).
Unless you configured sudo to use "closefrom=4" (or higher), you have to
combine this example with the option -C4 (which works only if sudo is
configured to allow closefrom_override):
	sudox -F3 -C4 user command

b) If # is 0 then no special sudo configuration is needed. However, the
executed command will have its standard input (0) closed. If you specify
#a as 0 then the "cat" command will be used to pipe standard input to the
standard input of the executed command, but the latter will break most
interactive programs and also has security implication (cat runs as the
calling user). Therefore, it is recommended to use -F0 only with programs
which do not expect standard input. To first transfer X cookies and then
to call an interactive program you can instead call sudox twice:
	sudox -F0 user true && sudox -X user [command ...]

3. Not very secure method: FIFO
If none of the above methods can be used (e.g. because sudo cannot be
configured and does not pass any variable or file descriptor) and you
do not want to use the file descriptor 0 workaround by calling sudox twice,
sudox can use a FIFO in a randomly generated temporary directory (whose
name is transferred over a command line) to transfer X cookies.
Since the FIFO has to be world readable, this method is insecure, because
an attacker can read the X cookies from this FIFO until the freshly started
sudo process reads it. Although sudox will recognize this and stop with an
error about a Troyan, but the attacker might misuse the X cookies already
and hide the display of this information.
However, the timeframe for the attacker to read the FIFO is only from the
call of sudox until the freshly started sudo process reads it.
Another disadvantage of the method is the same as that of 2:
sudox needs to keep a process running to fill the FIFO and cannot terminate
until the sudo program returns: The sudo process bcomes a child of sudox.
To select this method with sudox, use the option -F- (which is the same
option as for 2. but with # being -).

4. Insecure method: Command line
As a final fallback, the X cookies can be passed by the command line.
On most systems, the command line of a process can be accessed by every user,
so this is usually an insecure way of passing X cookies.
To select this method with sudox, use the option -v- (which is the same
option as for the "Environment Variable" method but with the special
variable name "-") (and do not use the "-F" option).

root mode alternative:
If the destination user has the permission to access the calling user's
XAUTHORITY file (default: ~/.Xauthority), then XAUTHORITY can be set
to that file. This has the implication that also all modifications of
permissions go to that file. In particular, this method cannot be used
to generate untrusted permissions for the destination user.
This method is used by sudox automatically if the destination user is root
and no untrusted permissions are requested. To override this default, use
the options -R (to force root mode) or -N (to force non-root mode).
